A Computational Account of the Role of Dopamine in
Autism Spectrum Disorders

Trenton Kriete & David C. Noelle

Abstract

Autism spectrum disorders are characterized by a diverse set of behavioral characteristics, including social difficulties, seizures, motor abnormalities, executive dysfunction, and cognitive inflexibility in learning. The breadth of this behavioral profile has made the identification of the underlying neural mechanisms extremely difficult. However, an examination of the various roles played by the dopamine system in learning, attention, and cognitive control uncovers a surprising connection between dopamine and the symptoms of autism. Dopamine abnormalities are associated with motor problems, repetitive behaviors, seizures, poor implicit learning, problems in learning to follow eye gaze, and compromised executive control. These observations suggest that impaired interactions between the dopamine system and the prefrontal cortex may account for many of the behavioral patterns observed in autism. Leading theories of the function of prefrontal cortex propose that this brain region actively maintains context information that modulates processing in other neural circuits so as to flexibly produce behavior appropriate for the current situation. The dopamine system offers a mechanism for learning when this actively maintained context information should be updated to support shifting task contingencies. We hypothesize that inflexibility in the updating of prefrontal cortex, caused by disrupted interactions with the dopamine system, accounts for many of the behaviors seen in autism. In this chapter, we demonstrate the viability of this hypothesis by perturbing the updating of prefrontal cortex in four computational models of healthy cognition, covering four distinct behavioral domains, producing autistic patterns of performance in all four cases through this common biological deficit. Specifically, we show how abnormal dopamine modulation of prefrontal cortex can explain executive dysfunction, impaired implicit learning, difficulties with word sense disambiguation, and differences during the learning of category structures. Thus, we offer a unifying account of phenomena that have previously been treated separately in the autism literature, and we demonstrate how computational cognitive neuroscience can expand our understanding of the biological foundations of developmental disorders.


Keywords: autism spectrum disorders, dopamine, prefrontal cortex, executive control, implicit learning, lexical disambiguation, category learning, computational cognitive neuroscience
